



Mikael Krogerus and
Roman Tschäppeler
THE COMMUNICATION BOOK
44 IDEAS FOR BETTER CONVERSATIONS EVERY DAY
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY SVEN WEBER
TRANSLATED BY JENNY PIENING AND LUCY JONES

Contents
The Authors
Introduction: We Need to Talk
JOB AND CAREER
1. Six Principles of Persuasion
2. Rules of Meetings
3. Boss Talk
4. The Salami Tactic
5. Theory of Rhetoric
6. Storytelling
7. Principled Negotiation
8. The Feedback Method
9. Groupthink
10. The Power Method
11. Intercultural Communication
SELF AND KNOWLEDGE
12. Self-Talk
13. Active Listening
14. Small Talk
15. The Iceberg Model
16. The Spiral of Silence
17. The Speech Act Theory
18. The Social Judgement Theory

19. The Sorry Matrix
20. White Lies
21. The Six-Word Rule
LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP
22. Watzlawick’s Axiom Theory
23. Proust’s Questionnaire
24. Nonviolent Communication
25. The Cooperative Principle
26. The Expectancy Violations Theory
27. Schulz von Thun’s Communication Model
28. Game Theory
29. Second-Order Observation
30. Transactional Analysis
31. Parenting Tips
32. L’Esprit de l’escalier
WORDS AND MEANINGS
33. The Framing Effect
34. McLuhan’s Media Theory
35. The FoMO Phenomenon
36. Lasswell’s Communication Model
37. The Uses and Gratifications Theory
38. The Encoding/Decoding Model
39. Visual Communication
40. Euphemisms
41. Sophism
42. The Cultivation Theory
43. The Standpoint Theory

CONCLUSION
44. The Peak–End Rule
Sources
Thanks
Follow Penguin

THE AUTHORS
Mikael Krogerus, born in 1976, is an editor at Das Magazin. He has also
worked for the youth TV show Chat the Planet in New York and for the NZZ
Folio in Zurich.
Roman Tschäppeler, born in 1978, founded his studio ‘guzo’ in 2003,
where he develops and produces films, campaigns and multimedia projects.
Mikael and Roman are both graduates of Kaospilot business school in
Denmark and are also authors of the international bestseller The Decision
Book and three other books that explain complex theories using simple
diagrams. They regularly give keynote speeches and lectures in which they
present their findings using only an old school blackboard.
rtmk.ch

Other books by the authors
The Decision Book
The Change Book
The Test Book
The Question Book

Introduction: We Need to Talk
Communication is a bit like love – it’s what makes the world go round, but
nobody really knows how it works. Communication is something natural,
something everyday even, yet most of us have only a vague notion of the
rules that govern it. Day in, day out, we ask questions, read, explain, write,
listen, argue, discuss or hold our tongues. But only a few of us have the
necessary tools to improve the way we communicate or to understand how
we’re being communicated with. This was the starting point for our
exploration of communication theory.
For this book we delved into some of the most important communication
theories, assessed their relevance, condensed them, simplified them in the
form of diagrams, and applied them to modern-day challenges. We also
enhanced them with practical tips and methods. The result: forty-four up-todate approaches for dealing with eternal problems, from relationships to job
interviews, fake news to the filter-bubble effect, small talk to the annual
presentation.
This book is actually an exhibition, which came about as follows: the
Museum of Communication in Bern, Switzerland, contacted us and asked if
we could explain the most important theories in communication history in
diagrams. Until 2030 you can experience this book live in the museum.

JOB AND CAREER



How to influence people
An American psychologist, Dr Robert Cialdini, has devoted much of his
career to one of the most basic and at the same time biggest questions within
communication: when do people say yes? Or more explicitly: can we make
them say yes?
Cialdini identified six universal principles that explain how you can
persuade someone to accept your suggestion:
1. Reciprocity: this is basically the old biblical principle: Do unto others as
you would have them do unto you. Put into action: if you want to get
something, give something. The right order is important: offer something
first. Then ask for what you want.
2. Authority: we tend to follow the advice of experts. We have more trust in a
doctor who is wearing a white coat and displaying diplomas on the wall.
Put into action: in your area of expertise, find out what the ‘white coat’ is.
3. Consistency: we look up to people who are consistent in their words and
behaviours. Put into action: stick to one message. Don’t follow every trend.
Be the consistent one, people will remember you for that.
4. Consensus: we are herd people. We do what others do. This is called
‘social proof’. Put into action: if you want someone to do something, show
others doing it (‘People who bought this book also bought …’).
5. Scarcity: we all want that which is rare and we are all afraid to lose what
we have. Put into action: it might not be enough to talk about the benefits
of your offer; you also need to point at what people will lose if they fail to
act. This also holds true if people face change: they are usually scared of
what they might lose. Therefore it’s good to tell them what they will lose if
they fail to move.
6. Liking: this is the most universal principle: people prefer to say yes to
people they like. But who do we like? According to Cialdini there are three
factors: we like people who are similar to us; we like people who
compliment us; we like people who cooperate with us towards a common
goal.
‘Get in the habit of helping people out, and don’t say, “No big deal.” Say, “Of
course; it’s what partners do for each other” – label what happened an act of
partnership.’
Robert Cialdini



Why meetings take so long
It is one of the great mysteries of the modern world of work: why are
meetings so exhausting? And why do they take so long?
According to Seth Godin, there are only three kinds of meetings:
· Information: a meeting in which the participants are informed about
something (whether they like it or not).
· Discussion: a meeting which aims to give input or direction, or to receive
feedback.
· Permission: a meeting in which one side proposes something, in the hope
that the other says yes (but has the right and the power to say no).
What often makes meetings frustrating is the fact that different people might
think it’s a different kind of meeting. Here are some tips to make meetings run
more smoothly:
The fifteen-minute rule
Parkinson’s Law states that Work expands so as to fill the time available for
its completion (and not according to how complex it really is). Therefore it
makes sense to limit the time of meetings. Incidentally, studies show that the
attention span of the average person is between ten and eighteen minutes.
Ideally, you should use a timer. When it rings, the meeting is over –
immediately.
The question rule
There are three types of question that you can ask in a meeting: first,
comprehension questions; second, questions to support the process (for
example, to make sure that everyone has really understood everything and is
talking about the same thing); and, third, questions that show how much you
know, in order to underscore your own position or challenge another person.
All three types of question are legitimate, but they should not be mixed: first
come comprehension questions, then questions about the process, then debate
questions.
The standing rule
In many companies, meetings are held with everybody standing up because it
leads to decisions being reached more quickly (see point 1). At Washington

University, studies showed that when they are standing, people react more
readily with enthusiasm, whereas when they are sitting, they tend towards
scepticism.
The smartphone rule
No smartphones during the meeting. Notes should be made by hand. Even the
White House supposedly followed this rule under Barack Obama.
If you want to call a family meeting, just turn off the WiFi router and wait in
the room where it is located.



How to talk to your team
Close your eyes for a moment and think about the best boss you ever had.
Now think of the worst one. What set them apart?
Most likely, your best boss not only achieved good results, but was also a
good communicator. Good bosses get the best out of their employees every
day, or at least give them the feeling they are achieving their full potential.
But how do they do it? In the context of this book, the question is: How do
you communicate properly with your employees, with your team?
Obviously there can’t be a universal answer: every person, every situation,
every company, every relationship is different. At the same time we all know
that we should speak to our team the way we would like to be spoken to:
considerately, directly, clearly. We’ve translated these adverbs into rules.
1. Don’t criticize
This might sound a bit too easy-going. And, of course, you have to evaluate
the work of your employees – that’s your job. But go easy on the criticism.
Only start deconstructing if you’re prepared to help with the rebuilding. Keep
using ‘we’. Especially when your team has lost.
2. Give praise (but not too much)
Go easy on the compliments, otherwise they lose their effect. If you celebrate
behaviour that you expect, you are lowering standards. Whatever you do,
don’t give praise simply to please.
3. Practise what you preach
Nothing rings more hollow than words that aren’t backed up by deeds. If
punctuality and friendliness are important to you, then be punctual and
friendly. Set the pace, demonstrate values, establish the tone. But pick your
battles, only set standards that are important to you – or that you consider to
be generally important. You ought to be good at upholding standards that are
important to you, and if there are standards that you regard as important but
find hard to uphold, then you need to learn them yourself. Share this with
your employees. Nobody can be good at everything.
As a leader, get used to the idea that you are primarily responsible for the
supply of energy. In other words: motivating, advising, stabilizing, providing
momentum – and letting others shine.



How to carry through every idea
Meetings are known to reveal a person’s character. Generally speaking, there
are four personality types in meetings:
1. The silent type says nothing, is thereby usually proven right, and always
thinks he or she knows better.
2. The opportunist is enthusiastic about every suggestion, especially those
made or favoured by the boss.
3. The ‘master of the obvious’ announces the obvious with great conviction,
as if he or she had just thought it up.
4. The nay-sayer’s purpose in life seems to be to pull apart other people’s
suggestions.
So how can you get a suggestion past these hellhounds? A particularly
effective method seems to be the Salami Tactic. Do not put your suggestion
forward all in one go, but serve it in small, easily digestible slices instead.
This portioning method has two advantages: first, the fear of a huge task or
bold idea is reduced; second, a measured presentation allows the other
participants to explore the idea themselves and think it through further. And,
above all, this tactic does not allow the other participants to recognize your
overarching intention. This makes it harder to fight against it. If there are
ideological rifts, it is better to take small, isolated steps and concentrate on the
matter at hand, not on the intended outcome.
And what do you do if someone tries to salami you? Simply ask: ‘Is that
everything?’ Keep on asking until everything is on the table. Only then start
negotiating, setting one slice of salami off against a slice of your own.
The origin of the term is unclear. Some sources say that in Hungary
Szalámitaktika was the name given to the gradual takeover of power by the
Communist Party.
Disassemble a truck into many small parts and a child can carry it.



How to make a good speech
In his definitive work Rhetoric, Aristotle wrote that a good speaker has to
have three things under control: the argument (logos), the presentation (ethos)
and the audience (pathos). This may sound pompous, but it is just as valid
today as in ancient times.
In Aristotle’s day, there were only three different types of rhetoric: the first
was judicial rhetoric, which dealt primarily with past events. Then there was
epideictic rhetoric, which typically celebrated a person in the present (a
typical example is a eulogy, which, Aristotle wrote, addresses the mourners
rather than the dead). And, finally, there was deliberative rhetoric, such as
political oratory, in which the speaker attempted to persuade the audience to
carry out a certain action in the near future.
Aristotle, and later the Romans Cicero and Quintilian, established a
complex five-point plan for writing brilliant speeches, which essentially boils
down to this: you should put all the aces that you want to play up your sleeve
in advance. Good preparation, in other words, is everything.
Aristotle considered rhetoric not as a tool to convince the audience, but as
an art form to help present a persuasive argument. This was the end to which
the speaker should employ rhetoric. Because people with good ideas are often
poor speakers, he provided them with a toolbox full of rhetorical resources.
So Aristotle was in fact the first person to prepare academics for their TED
talks and keynotes. Below are six rhetorical tools:
1. Anaphora: repetition of a word or phrase, typical in political speeches: ‘I
demand justice. I demand understanding. I demand …’
2. Inversion: reversing the usual word order, such as in ‘Infinite is his sorrow’
(instead of ‘His sorrow is infinite’).
3. Irony: saying one thing when you really mean the opposite, e.g. ‘I really
enjoyed being stuck in that traffic jam.’
4. Rhetorical questions: questions that make a statement, e.g. ‘Would you
like shiny, glossy hair?’
5. Analogies (comparisons): ‘He stood there like a dying duck in a
thunderstorm’ (banal) or ‘He was as confused as a comma at the end of a
sentence’ (creative).
6. Antithesis: a contrasting thought to produce tension, e.g. ‘He was
beautiful, strong and … unhappy.’
In practice, the same applies to presentations as to speeches: read through
your text aloud several times (one full sheet of A4 is about four minutes of

presentation). Remember to integrate pauses. Look at your audience. Breathe
deeply.
A good speech is one that induces the listeners to change their minds, while
giving them the feeling that this change of opinion is their own decision.



How to make the most boring lecture exciting
Why do all fairy tales begin with the phrase ‘Once upon a time …’?
The answer is relevant for anyone who gives presentations: according to
the sociolinguist William Labov, if we weave hard facts into narrative
patterns, associations with well-known fairy tales are evoked in our memories
which remind us of the pleasure of listening to them. With the consequence
that our attention span increases. Classic fairy tales follow a particular
sequence:
· Abstract: how does it begin? (‘Once upon a time …’)
· Orientation: who/where/when? (‘A king and queen had a daughter …’)
· Complicating action: the problem to be solved (‘But all around the castle, a
hedge of thorns started to grow …’)
· Resolution: solution (‘Then he stooped and kissed Sleeping Beauty. And
she opened her eyes for the first time in many, many years …’)
· Evaluation: what results from it? (‘And they lived happily ever after.’)
· Coda: what remains (‘And the moral of the story …’)
A lecture should be structured along the same lines. The idea is not new.
Aristotle (see ‘Theory of Rhetoric’) was already aware of the importance of
emotion in speech-making. And in 1984 the communication researcher Walter
Fisher came up with a radical thesis: people do not want logical arguments;
they want good stories. Our life is not an Excel spreadsheet – it is a story with
ups and downs. Fisher’s idea is summed up in his famous ‘narrative
paradigm’, which represents a break with classical rhetoric: we do not
evaluate a story on the basis of arguments, but on the basis of how much we
trust or believe in the story (can I identify with the subject or the people?) and
its coherence (does the story make sense?).
Chris Anderson, the inventor of TED, says something similar about the
three rules for a perfect TED talk: 1. Don’t talk about a concept, a deficiency
or a product; talk about an idea. 2. Focus on just one idea. 3. Talk about the
idea in such a way that people will want to tell others about it.
The next time you have to say something in front of other people, start your
talk with this sentence: ‘Let me tell you a short story …’ or ‘On the way here,
something strange happened to me …’



How to reach an agreement
Negotiation is the fine art of finding a solution to an apparently impossible
situation. One of the best-known negotiating methods, ‘principled
negotiation’, is based on the book Getting to Yes by Roger Fisher and William
L. Ury.
Let’s break down their strategy and apply it to real life: think about a
complex situation – negotiating your salary with your boss, pocket money
with your children, a ransom demanded by a blackmailer – and try to apply
the following principles to the situation:
· Thing, not person: do not be distracted by whether you like the other
person or not.
· Similarities, not differences: don’t think: I am in the weaker [or stronger]
negotiating position. Ask yourself: What does the other person need from
me? Do we have common interests?
· Good enough, not perfect: you should not be aiming for the maximum
possible. Because perfection is like the unicorn: it’s rumoured to exist, but
nobody has ever seen it. So, alongside your desired outcome to the
negotiation, have a Plan B prepared before negotiations even start. This is
called the BATNA Principle (Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement).
It offers the best alternative when an agreement can’t be reached.
There are two schools of thought when it comes to negotiation: the first
believes that you have to negotiate ‘hard’ and ‘conquer’ the other side (‘It’s
not enough to win, someone has to lose’); the other recommends negotiating
‘softly’ in order not to put a strain on the relationship. ‘Principled negotiation’
falls into the second camp and recommends cooperative negotiation.
Negotiating properly means that everyone gets more than they originally
hoped for.
‘You must never try to make all the money that’s in a deal. Let the other
fellow make some money too, because if you have a reputation for always
making all the money, you won’t have many deals.’
J. Paul Getty



How to criticize
Feedback is one of the most sensitive processes in communication. It is easy
to hurt people with criticism, but false compliments are also unhelpful. Harsh
criticism damages our self-esteem and can lead us to make unwise choices,
but flowery compliments often make us too complacent.
As for the person giving the feedback: most people are prone to being
critical, as it gives them a feeling of superiority. They feel like they need to
crush bad or weird ideas.
Feedback can be analysed along two axes: it can be negative or positive
and constructive or destructive. So this gives us four different types of
feedback.
1. ‘No’ – negative, destructive feedback: you are simply told the idea is bad
without being given an explanation or offered an alternative. While this can
be at times an effective feedback it seldom changes the behaviour of the
receiver.
2. ‘No, because …’ – negative, constructive feedback: you are told you’re
wrong and then you are presented with the correct answer. This is how oldschool teaching works.
3. ‘Yeah, but …’ – positive, destructive feedback: most managers have
sooner or later heard about the importance of giving positive feedback. So
they start off by saying something positive about your idea, just to
deconstruct it afterwards and offer a contrary opinion (‘The idea is good,
but …’).
4. ‘Yes, and …’ – the appreciative response: try to find the one thing in the
proposal that works and build on that. This goes back to ‘appreciative
inquiry’, a method attributed to an American, David Cooperrider, that
involves concentrating on the strengths, positive attributes and potential of
a company or a person, rather than weaknesses. According to this theory,
focusing too strongly on the flaws of an idea or project stifles the open and
positive approach that is essential for good working practices.
Careful: of course, we sometimes have to deliver crystal-clear or even harsh
feedback. But the point is, people learn better if they are offered constructive
feedback. We know this from brainstorming sessions where the flow and fun
increase the more positive the exchange. Collaboration, it seems, dies when
the response is negative and ideas are killed before they are explored.

Whenever you are about to give feedback, ask yourself: ‘How can I make this
idea better?’ rather than ‘Why is this idea bad?’



What happens when everyone has the same opinion
For a long time it was common knowledge that group decision making was
better than individual decision making. Even today we often celebrate
collaborations, consensual decisions and teamwork.
However, as early as 1972 a Yale psychologist, Irving Janis, pointed out in
a spectacular, radical paper that sometimes also groups make very bad
decisions. Janis had studied such debacles as Pearl Harbor or the Vietnam
War. And what he found was that these groups had rejected critical opinions
and outside information.
In the warmth of a like-minded group people reassure themselves that they
are right, that their analysis is superior to that of outsiders, that their
consensus is a sign of the strength of the group, when in fact they have been
looking only for evidence that confirmed their objectives. And any doubts in
the room were silenced because if everyone seems enthusiastic and agrees
with the plan, we will feel reluctant to speak up – even if we have serious
doubts. This, by the way, seems to be one of the governing principles of
Donald Trump’s leadership strategy: surround yourself with yes-sayers.
Janis called the phenomenon that occurs when the desire for group
consensus is stronger than the urge to express an unpopular opinion
‘Groupthink’. If this happens, the group is at risk of making very poor
decisions. And even more: if many people are too sure of the same thing, they
become radical and imprudent. Researchers have observed this phenomenon
among jury members: the greater the consensus, the harsher the judgement,
and the surer the jury is that its verdict is correct.
When does groupthink occur?
Typically, when there is:
· High group cohesiveness
· High pressure to make a good decision
· Strong, persuasive, directive leadership
How can we avoid groupthink?
Janis suggested several steps for preventing groupthink. Here are two great
recommendations if you are the leader of a team:
1. ‘Give a high priority to airing objections and doubts.’ In other words:
encourage all group members to speak their mind. Even and especially if

the opinion is unpopular.
2. Divide your team into two and form competing teams to study the same
problem. Compare results.
‘When all think alike, no one is thinking.’
Walter Lippmann



When the force is with you
Most theories in this book argue that good communication has to do with
cooperation. But in reality it’s sometimes a different story. It is no coincidence
that the book The 48 Laws of Power, a compilation of classic power strategies
by the American author Robert Greene, was a bestseller. Borrowing from this
book, here are some negotiating strategies that won’t make you popular, but
might help you come out on top. (Warning: even if you prefer to convince
people with good arguments rather than by mean tactics, you should know
these tricks because they are bound to be used against you.)
Never argue hesitantly
If you are unsure about something, try not to show it to others. Doubt and
hesitation will only dilute your arguments. With ‘for and against’
formulations, your adversary will see an opportunity to pounce. So only speak
up when you’re sure you want to follow through your argument, and stand
your ground – even if your plan is flawed. We forgive bold people their
mistakes, but have no confidence in doubters.
Talk less
Counterintuitively, you should not try to convince the other person by talking
a lot. The more you talk, the more interchangeable and ordinary your
arguments seem. Every triumph that you achieve through words is in reality a
pyrrhic victory, because nobody likes to be argued into a corner.
Act ignorant
We tend to be dazzled by intelligence and charisma. Try the opposite: make
your adversary feel clever. He or she will be flattered and become inattentive.
When your opponent’s guard drops, you can attack. Acting stupid is one of
the oldest stratagems around. As they say in China: ‘Masquerade as a pig to
kill the tiger.’
Give up
If you can’t convince somebody, reassess your own situation: what will it cost
me if I give up now? A smiling confession of your own defeat comes across
as more self-assured than sullenness. And, what’s more, the less interest you
show, the less satisfied your adversary will feel.

‘Oysters open completely when the moon is full; and when the crab sees one
it throws a piece of stone or seaweed into it and the oyster cannot close again,
so that it serves the crab for meat. Such is the fate of him who opens his
mouth too much and thereby puts himself at the mercy of the listener.’
Leonardo da Vinci



How to negotiate abroad
‘There was once a Finn who loved his wife so much that he almost told her.’
It’s a joke, and yet not a joke. Because many Finns are indeed introverted,
taciturn people.
Anyone who has come into contact with other cultures knows that
stereotypes and prejudices can’t always be trusted (the Scots are frugal, the
Swiss are punctual, the Finns are introverted), but that they do often contain a
germ of truth. Or, to put it another way, you might say that while many
clichés are true, the more you get to know a culture, the more black and white
turns to grey.
In order to get to grips with a culture it is not enough to master the
language, as cultural idiosyncrasies are more apparent in the way we
communicate than in what we communicate. What is required is so-called
‘intercultural communication’. The term was coined by the Dutch social
psychologist Geert Hofstede, while its most famous proponent is the British
linguist Richard D. Lewis. In his classic book When Cultures Collide (2005),
he defines three main cultural types: the linear-active, the multi-active and the
reactive:
1. The linear-active, who include most of Western Europe and the USA, talk
about as much as they listen, have fairly restrained body language, are
polite but direct, like to deal in facts, and place value on the written word.
They don’t do two things at once.
2. The multi-active, such as Mediterraneans or Saudi Arabians, are
loquacious, gesticulate a lot, are emotional, juggle with facts, place value
on the spoken word, and do many things at the same time.
3. The reactive, such as the Japanese, Chinese and Koreans, speak less and
try to get their counterpart to speak first; they have very subtle body
language, are courteous and indirect, are non-confrontational, and place
value on face-to-face communication.
But, contrary to what our schematic categorization might suggest, there are
no pure alignments, only spectrums. Indians, for example, are hybrid – they
are both reactive and multi-active. Canada is on the borderline between linearactive and reactive.
Linear-active: if you are intrigued by the questions ‘What? When? How
many?’

Multi-active: if you are intrigued by ‘how’ people communicate and relate to
each other.
Reactive: if you’re convinced by ‘who’says it and their experience and
authority.

SELF AND KNOWLEDGE



How to (de)motivate ourselves
There are two kinds of self-talk: the first is the unselfconscious babbling of
little children as they play or the thinking aloud of contestants in TV shows
such as Who Wants to be a Millionaire? These types of inner monologue were
called ‘egocentric speech’ by the developmental psychologist Jean Piaget. He
believed they were a sign of cognitive immaturity. Today, we know that
thinking aloud is an excellent method for ordering our thoughts and
improving concentration.
The second type of self-talk is the inner dialogue. We comment on our own
behaviour in a similar way to a sports commentator reporting on events
during a football match (the only difference being that the footballers can’t
hear the comments, whereas we constantly have our ‘internal moderator’ in
our ear). In the field of psychology, this is considered to be a healthy form of
self-evaluation. However, a distinction is made between positive and negative
self-talk:
Negative self-talk typically contains one of these thoughts:
· Generalization: ‘I have already been left twice – people will always leave
me.’
· Rash conclusions: ‘Why doesn’t she call? I think she doesn’t like me.’
· Self-blame: ‘I should have done differently’ or ‘I’m a bad father.’
Positive self-talk is about breaking through the above negative patterns of
thought. It’s not about convincing yourself that life is great, but rather about
freeing yourself from a cycle of negative thinking. For example, if you say:
‘I’ll never manage it’, ask yourself instead: ‘What can I do in order to manage
it?’
In a nutshell: self-talk serves two different functions: first, concentration;
and, second, motivation.
‘[Talking to myself] is the only way I can be sure of intelligent conversation.’
‘Edmund Blackadder’



How we are (not always) all ears
Paradoxically, in our age of constant communication, the raw material of
conversation has actually disappeared: listening. Genuine, real listening is a
rare commodity and a great gift, because you are giving to the person you are
listening to your most valuable asset: your attention.
Here are a few suggestions of how to do it right, based on the
communication technique ‘active listening’ devised by Carl Rogers and
Richard Farson in 1957.
Listen, don’t talk
As the cartoon here suggests, resist talking about yourself. Or as the radio
host Celeste Headlee put it brilliantly in a TEDx speech: ‘If they’re talking
about having lost a family member, don’t start talking about the time you lost
a family member. If they’re talking about the trouble they’re having at work,
don’t tell them about how much you hate your job. It’s not the same. It’s
never the same. All experiences are individual. And, more importantly, it’s
not about you.’
Don’t finish the other person’s …
Some people have a tendency of impatiently finishing the sentence or thought
of the person they are talking to. Although very slow thinking and talking can
be irritating, don’t interrupt, even if you think it might show empathy.
Your body language says a lot
Look the other person in the eye – but don’t stare. Nod – but only if you want
to agree with what they are saying or show that you have understood
something important.
Notice the little things
Listen out for details in what they are saying and pick up on these later. This
makes it easier to ask questions (‘You mentioned that you spent a lot of time
as a child at your grandmother’s – what kind of relationship did you have
with her?’). And it lets the other person know that you were really listening.
Be a friend, not a judge

Resist the impulse of giving the other person advice – unless of course they
specifically ask for it. Instead, take the conversation back to an exciting,
important part of the story: ‘Earlier, you said that …’ Take the person away
from the smooth surface to deeper levels: ‘How was it for you, when you …?’
Or encourage the person to keep talking by simply asking: ‘And what
happened next?’
‘The most romantic gift: to listen to another’s anxieties for one hour, without
judgement or “solutions”, as an analyst might.’
Alain de Botton



How to start a conversation with strangers
Small talk is actually something very big. Those who manage to start a
conversation with strangers, break the ice and treat them like friends have the
world at their feet (see ‘proust’s Questionnaire’). But it’s incredibly difficult.
There has been little serious research into the art of small talk and there are
few reliable theories, but, nonetheless, here are some practical tips.
Ask for advice
People love giving advice. So, start your small talk with a request for advice:
‘I want to buy a smartphone [or a cocktail or a book], but I can’t decide which
one.’ Most people will happily open up. Then thank them for the tip and the
other person will feel like a fireman who has successfully extinguished a fire.
The psychology behind this: if you ask for advice, you create intimacy:
intimacy makes rejection difficult. Therefore, if you want to influence
someone, it is a good idea to ask that person for advice first.
Ask a second question
We often ask something and then wait for the other person to ask something
back. This is not a conversation. Instead, use the old reporter trick and ask a
second question. If you just asked ‘Where did you grow up?’, then a good
follow-up question might be: ‘How has that place shaped you?’
Don’t ask: ‘What do you do for a living?’
There are two kinds of people: those who like to talk about their job and go
on and on about it; and those who are ashamed of their job, hate it or don’t
have one. The latter are reluctant to talk about this topic. The author Gretchen
Rubin suggests this simple but powerful tweak to the usual ‘What do you do
for a living?’ job question: ‘What’s keeping you busy these days?’ Now the
other person can choose what to talk about.
Don’t start a conversation about things that interest you
Most people like to talk about themselves. This leads to us not listening any
more, but simply waiting for our turn to speak. But a conversation is not a
PowerPoint presentation. Don’t pitch your topics. Rather be the one person in
the group who is interested in the other person’s topics. As Bill Nye put it:
‘Everyone you’ll ever meet knows something that you don’t.’

Listen
The way people deal with you depends on how you present yourself: arrogant,
worldly-wise or dull posturing brings out the same behaviour in your
counterpart. The supreme rule when making small talk comes from the radio
host Celeste Headlee: ‘Enter every conversation assuming that you have
something to learn.’ People forget what they talked about with you, but not
how they felt in your presence.
‘We have two ears and only one mouth so that we can listen twice as much as
we speak.’
Epictetus



What happens below the surface
One of the most frequently cited and simplest but also most inscrutable of all
communication theories is the Iceberg Theory.
Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, believed that human
behaviour is governed above all by the unconscious – like an iceberg, where
only the tip protrudes from the water, while the usually much bigger and
mostly invisible part is below the surface. (At this point, it should be
mentioned that we do not know for sure who came up with this brilliant
metaphor – it certainly wasn’t Freud; some say it was Hemingway, who in the
1930s claimed that an author does not have to explicitly reveal the deeper
meaning of a story (see ‘The Six-Word Rule’). It is sufficient if, like an
iceberg, only a tenth is visible above water.
If we apply this rule to communication, we could say that the visible,
conscious part of a discussion is the factual level (what we say or what we
talk about), while the unconscious part is the interpersonal level (how we say
it and what we really mean) – see ‘Lasswell’s Communication Model’ and
‘Watzlawick’s Axiom Theory’. This means we can control the factual level,
we can select our words consciously, but our gestures, facial expression and
tone of voice will betray our unconscious secret hopes, repressed conflicts,
traumatic experiences, base motives and animal instincts, and appeal to the
other person’s unconscious. The interpersonal level decides how we will be
perceived and how we perceive others.
The more we know about another person’s values, patterns of behaviour,
motives – in other words, the more we see of the iceberg – the better we can
understand the person’s words and actions. The best way to ‘lower the
waterline’ of your opponent or partner is to show more of yourself. If you, for
example, want someone to admit something, start by talking honestly about
your own mistakes.
‘Fear and hope are alike underneath.’
Richard Ford



Why we don’t dare state our opinion
Let us assume that you have a five-hour train ride ahead of you, and in your
crowded compartment a person starts talking about tightening the asylum
laws. Would you like to talk to this person or not?
This is the ‘railway test’, which the German social scientist Elisabeth
Noelle-Neumann used to examine who sticks up for their opinion in public
and who doesn’t. Her hypothesis: the willingness of people to voice their
opinion in public dwindles in situations where they believe that the majority
opinion is different from their own. In other words, we do not like to be of a
different opinion to others. If we notice that the group majority has a different
opinion to ours, we remain silent. This phenomenon is called the ‘spiral of
silence’ and can be explained by these six points, of which the last two are
arguably the most important:
1. Most people have a fear of isolation and observe the behaviour of others to
assess which opinions will be accepted or rejected. ‘We fear isolation more
than being wrong,’ wrote Alexis de Tocqueville in the nineteenth century.
2. We exert pressure on each other: we pull a face, roll our eyes or turn away
when someone says something that does not comply with the prevailing
opinion.
3. Fear of isolation and a pressure to conform occur unconsciously. We do not
think about the extent to which we are guided by public opinion.
4. We tend to conceal our opinion if we think that it will expose us to group
pressure. If we feel public support, however, we tend to express our
opinion loudly and clearly.
5. If consensus on a subject prevails in a group, it is unlikely that a spiral of
silence will begin.
6. The number of people who share an opinion is not necessarily significant.
A minority opinion can appear to be a majority opinion if its proponents
appear confident enough and represent their opinion in public forcefully.
We become quieter if we believe that we are in the minority.



How words can trigger actions
You can do an incredible amount with words. How to Do Things with Words
is also the name of the well-known book by the British philosopher J. L.
Austin from 1962, in which he substantiated ‘language theory’.
He argued that in day-to-day life we distinguish between ‘doing’ and
‘talking’ but that there is in fact no difference. Speaking is also an action. His
thesis: sentences have a ‘propositional’ meaning (this is the information
contained in the sentence), which can be ‘true’ or ‘false’. But sentences also
have an ‘illocutionary’ meaning. This means that we are doing something
when we speak, including something essential (‘doing something in saying
something’). Examples include requests, warnings, threats, recommendations.
Such an illocution can succeed or fail – for example, if you don’t take the
speaker seriously, the act of speaking has failed. Then there is a third
dimension, the perlocution. Here it is about the extent to which whatever was
said has consequences – so whether the person being addressed acts on what
is said or has a change of mind because of it (‘doing something by saying
something’).
Let’s take an example. If you say to a couple who happen to be sitting next
to you: ‘I hereby declare you husband and wife’, then the ‘proposition’ is the
same as what a vicar would say at a marriage ceremony in a church. The
difference: the sentence is just words. But spoken by a vicar the sentence has
weight and effect; it is ‘illocutionary’ and seals the marriage. And with a bit
of luck it is also perlocutionary, if the married couple stick to their vows in
future. The sentence of the vicar thereby triggers subsequent actions.
The Speech Act Theory explained in two sentences: ‘What do we do when we
speak? What impact do we have when we speak?’



Which of our opinions never change
A question that continues to preoccupy researchers into communication is
this: when do people allow themselves to be persuaded about something and
when not? Why is it that some of our attitudes are deeply ingrained and not up
for discussion (e.g. allegiance to a particular football club), while we change
others at the drop of a hat (favourite TV series, for example)?
An explanation is offered by the Social Judgement Theory. According to
this theory, there are three factors that play a role in persuading us to change
our opinion:
1. The anchor point: this is our basic preferred attitude. This attitude is hard
to budge, and we are unlikely to change it, regardless of what information
we are given. So, for example, if we were to discover that the players of
our favourite football team were manipulating games, we might be
shocked, but it wouldn’t put an end to our long love affair.
2. Room for manoeuvre: here it is about which alternative attitudes we find
acceptable, regardless of our own. These are attitudes that we can accept
without having to hoist our anchor. This approach can lead to a change of
opinion in the long term.
3. Ego involvement: the most complicated part: what does our ego have to
say? Take the death penalty, for example, which clearly contradicts the
anchor point ‘human rights’, leaving little room for manoeuvre. But it is
conceivable that if we were personally affected by a murder, we might feel
vengeful towards the perpetrator and change our mind, at least briefly.
The stronger our anchor, i.e. our firm position on an issue, the harder it is to
be persuaded by a different opinion. The stronger you pull at another person’s
anchor, the stronger their resistance. (How can you can succeed anyway? See
‘Six Principles of Persuasion’.)
If you can’t change your mind, then you’re not using it.



How to apologize properly so that the other person forgives and
forgets
Apologizing is one of the most difficult interpersonal communication
situations. A few years ago, a team of researchers from Ohio State University
tackled this issue and played through a variety of approaches. We translate
their findings into strategies:
Use ‘I’sentences
Apologizing means taking on full responsibility for something. Sentences like
‘I’m sorry that your feelings were hurt’, or ‘I’m sorry that you’re so angry’,
should be avoided (because what you’re implying is: it doesn’t have anything
to do with me that your feelings are hurt). Say it like it is: ‘I’m sorry that I
hurt your feelings.’ According to the research, a person is most likely to
forgive and forget if you admit full responsibility for what you did.
Don’t justify your actions
It is a natural reflex to try to justify your own actions. But also an idiotic one.
Because a justification is in effect a denial of the apology. The following
sentences are particularly counterproductive: ‘Come on, it wasn’t that bad!’ or
‘I can’t help it.’ The injured person will be more inclined to forgive if you
come up with a reason rather than a justification: try to explain your action
without being defensive. Most effective of all are an explanation and an
admission of guilt combined.
Avoid ‘but’sentences
An apology in which the word ‘but’ crops up is almost never understood as an
apology but as an excuse. Avoid at all costs.
Don’t ask for forgiveness
Asking for forgiveness is rarely effective. According to the research, you can
spare yourself the bother. Nobody likes to grant absolution.
Change yourself
Even the most honest apology is worthless if you repeat the same mistake
three times. Making an apology is above all a commitment to making a

change and an offer to make amends.
When it comes to apologies, keep in mind there are only two ways: you can
apologize begrudgingly or sincerely. Choose the latter.



How to answer the question: ‘How do I look?’
The truth is, all people lie. In certain situations – such as when we are under
pressure, have to justify ourselves, or want to make a good impression – we
tend more towards fibbing and telling tales than when we feel relaxed and
self-secure. But, from an ethical point of view, not every lie is bad. You
might, for example, lie in order to protect someone. In communication theory,
lies fall into two categories: do I benefit from the lie or does the person I lied
to benefit? This results in four different outcomes.
1. White lie – only the person lied to benefits: this is a fine, selfless lie in
which you risk potential loss to help someone out. Here, you typically put
yourself in the position of the person and, for example, defend the
existence of Santa Claus in the knowledge that the lie will be exposed in
due time. This altruistic lie gives us a good feeling.
2. Grey lie – both the liar and the person lied to benefit: ‘You’ve lost
weight!’ Grey lies are often part of cultural norms. In many situations,
when you ask: ‘How are you?’, you expect a lie in response: ‘Thank you,
things are great!’
3. Black lie – only the liar benefits: although you are guilty, you reject all
accusations: ‘No, I didn’t take the money!’ It is often also a bold promise, a
proactive lie: ‘If I am elected I will never raise taxes …’ Here, bare-faced
lying is used to your own advantage.
4. Red lie – no one benefits: this is the lowest form of lying. Saying
something with complete awareness that the other person knows the
statement to be false, even if you sometimes end up also inflicting damage
on yourself: ‘The largest audience ever to witness an inauguration.’
‘If you tell the truth, you don’t have to remember anything.’
Mark Twain



How to sum up a whole life in six words
No one knows whether the story’s true, but it is a good one anyway. Ernest
Hemingway was sitting having a drink with some writer friends at Lüchow’s
restaurant in New York. They were talking about this and that, and eventually
moved on to what the ideal length of a good novel might be. Hemingway
claimed that he could write a novel in six words: the others each bet ten
dollars that he couldn’t. Whereupon Hemingway wrote: ‘For sale: baby shoes,
never worn’ on a napkin. Six words, behind which lies a tragedy. Those who
don’t gulp when they read this must have hearts of stone.
In 2006, Larry Smith, founder and editor of SMITH magazine, asked: ‘Can
you tell your life story in six words?’
A dumped 27-year-old guy wrote: ‘I still make coffee for two.’ ‘Cursed
with cancer. Blessed with friends’ came from a nine-year-old cancer survivor.
The singer Moby confessed: ‘Dad died, mom crazy, me, too.’ And George
Saunders summed life up beautifully: ‘Started small, grew, peaked, shrunk,
vanished.’
Smith’s formal restriction proved not to be limiting but stimulating, and in
the spirit of the pithy language used in social media, the logic of the 140-
character tweet and the compulsive succinctness of texts, six-word memoirs
became a hit.
The thinking behind the abbreviated form: language is beautiful, and its
diversity and complexity are a reflection of the depth of human sensibility.
But it is also an excellent tool with which to beat around the bush. The SixWord Rule is not a rejection of sprawling, convoluted sentences or endless
digressions; even Hemingway was of the opinion that not every idea can be
pared down. But before writing (or speaking), you should ask yourself these
questions: What do I really want to say and can I say it more succinctly?
If it’s important, keep it short.

LOVE AND FRIENDSHI P



How relationships fail
An axiom is a valid truth that needs no proof. At the end of the 1960s, the
communication theorist Paul Watzlawick, together with other researchers,
came up with five axioms to explain how interpersonal communication –
especially in relationships – fails.
1. You cannot not communicate
A man comes home, sits down, stares into space and is silent. His wife looks
at him and asks him how he is. He says nothing – and yet he communicates
something. It is immediately clear that something must have happened. Even
if you say nothing, you are saying something.
2. All communication has a relationship aspect and a content aspect
The content aspect is what we say. The relationship aspect includes how we
say things, but also who says something (see ‘Schulz von Thun’s
Communication Model’). Who says something and how it is said always
weigh heavier than what is said. If we are offended by a complete stranger, it
affects us less than if our partner offends us. Also keep in mind Albert
Mehrabian’s 7%–38%–55% Rule. If we are talking to someone about our
feelings, this is the impact our words, tone of voice and body language have:
our words are 7 per cent, our tone of voice 38 per cent and our body language
55 per cent responsible for whether that person likes us.
3. Communication is always about cause and effect
A woman is annoyed because her partner is grumbling. The man is grumbling
because the woman is annoyed. In other words: we seldom quarrel with
ourselves – it will always take two to tango.
4. Human communication makes use of analogue and digital modalities
In Watzlawick’s terms, ‘digital’ means verbally and ‘analogue’ means nonverbally – in other words, eye-rolling, a smug smile, ambiguous intonation. If
the two levels do not correlate, then we’re not on the same page.
5. Communication is symmetric or complementary
Relationships between partners are either symmetrical (equal) or
complementary (unequal). Symmetric means that we talk at eye level (in the

relationship); complementary means that there is a kind of hierarchy (for
example, between teacher and pupil). If we do not agree whether the
communication is complementary or symmetrical, it becomes problematic.
Everyone hears what you say. Friends listen to what you say. Best friends
listen to what you don’t say.



How to ask good questions
In the late nineteenth century, light conversation (or ‘small talk’ in modern
English – see ‘Small Talk’) was crucial to the success of an evening. Being
refined was not about saying the right thing without having to think too hard,
nor was it about getting the other person to laugh at one’s charming, witty
remarks. Instead, the ideal neighbour at a dinner party was the one who had
mastered the fine art of asking questions. The explanation for this is simple,
and truthful, and can be summed up with this rule: we do not appreciate those
who are brilliant, but those who make us feel brilliant.
But because it is extremely difficult to ask the right question in the right
situation, a small crib sheet soon circulated around European salons. It
consisted of questions that seemed innocent but which bared the soul, such as
‘Who would you prefer to be?’, ‘How would you like to die?’ and ‘Which
characteristics do you most appreciate in a man?’ The author of the
questionnaire remains unknown to this day. In 1885, Marcel Proust (then only
thirteen years old) answered the questionnaire at his friend Antoinette Faure’s
birthday party. In 1924, Faure’s son published Proust’s answers; since then it
has been known as ‘Proust’s Questionnaire’. The fact that he didn’t invent it,
but simply filled it in, speaks in favour of the charm of the above rule.
Proust’s questions have three key qualities:
1. They are open questions that you cannot answer with yes or no.
2. The questions require no prior knowledge; in other words, there are no
right or wrong answers, only honest ones.
3. They are questions that centre on your counterpart rather than on you.
We all admire people who give good answers. But we admire those who ask
good questions even more. The people we remember most are the ones who
really listen.



Why we find it difficult to be friendly
Psychologists generally agree that conflicts need to be dealt with, but the
question is: how? The American psychologist Marshall B. Rosenberg (1934–
2015) developed the idea of nonviolent communication based on the premise
that it’s not what you say, but how you say it. He distinguishes between
speaking snappishly, ‘language of the jackal’, and speaking from the heart,
‘language of the giraffe’ (giraffes have the biggest heart of any land animal).
This may sound like mumbo jumbo, but it comes closer to reality than most
management jargon. The language of the jackal causes the speaker to feel
superior and the person being addressed to feel bad. Typical examples of
jackal language:
· Analysis: ‘That’s wrong, because …’
· Criticism: ‘The mistake you made was that you …’
· Interpretations: ‘You do that because …’
· Appraisals: ‘You’re smart/lazy, you’re right/wrong …’
· Threats: ‘If you don’t do it immediately, I’ll have to …’
According to Rosenberg, statements like these are ‘desires in disguise’.
Because we have not learned to ask for something politely or to express our
wishes constructively, we resort to aggressive language. And aggression leads
to counter-aggression or submissive subjugation.
Giraffe language, on the other hand, works like this:
· Observe without evaluating: ‘You always look out of the window when I
want to talk to you.’
· Acknowledge and define your own or others’ feelings: ‘I’m worried.’
· Acknowledge needs and take them seriously: ‘I want to know how you’re
doing.’
· Express clear and achievable objectives based on these needs: ‘Please tell
me what you need, so that we can talk about it.’
But why is it so difficult to be friendly? Often, we ourselves are the
problem. Take the so-called ‘attribution error’: if we arrive late, there was a
lot of traffic. If others arrive late, they set off too late (or for people with a
negative frame of mind, the other way round). We are by nature prone to pass
judgement, and what’s more, it is easier to blame someone else than to think
about why something happened.

The essence of normal communication: we all like to be right. The essence of
nonviolent communication: we are better off if we resolve a dispute than if we
win it. Or in the words of Marshall Rosenberg: ‘Would you rather be right …
or happy …?’



How we should express ourselves in order to be understood
People’s three biggest fears: loving someone without being loved in return;
searching for friends and not finding any; saying something and not being
understood. There is no solution to the first two. For the third there is at least
a principle. The British philosopher Paul Grice (1913–88) dedicated his life to
this problem and in 1975 finally formulated the so-called Cooperative
Principle, a basic rule for effective communication:
‘Make your conversational contribution such as is required, at the stage at
which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or direction of the talk exchange in
which you are engaged.’
You might be thinking that Grice could have done with some language
training himself, but let’s take a closer look at what the Cooperative Principle
is actually all about. According to Grice, speaker and listener want to (and
have to) behave cooperatively. This means that one person wants to be
understood, the other to understand. In order for this to work, Grice proposed
four conversational maxims:
1. Maxim of quantity: say enough for your counterpart to understand, but
don’t say too much, or you will cause confusion.
2. Maxim of quality: tell the truth, don’t speculate, don’t dupe the person into
believing something different.
3. Maxim of relevance: don’t say anything irrelevant, don’t change the
subject.
4. Maxim of manner: avoid ambiguity, vagueness, verbosity and volatility,
and stick to a logical argument.
If we follow these maxims, then, as a general rule, we will be understood. But
what happens if we don’t follow them, which is the case in most of our
conversations?
· We can violate the maxims without being noticed. That’s called ‘lying’.
(‘Did you wreck the car?’ ‘No, I didn’t’ – although you did.)
· We can violate the maxims deliberately by saying something else but
expecting the listener to understand the message correctly. That’s called
‘flouting’. (A typical form is irony: you look out of the window to see the
storm intensify. You then turn to your friend and say: ‘What wonderful
weather!’)

· We can refrain from cooperation. That’s called ‘opting out’. (If you say: ‘My
lips are sealed’, this implies you know something, but won’t talk about it
and this will end all communication.)
Only say what is true and important, and express it clearly and simply.



How much distance we keep from other people
Perhaps you know the feeling: you’re sitting in the cinema, the film hasn’t
started yet, the auditorium is barely a third full, and several rows are
completely empty. Someone comes in, looks around, walks past the empty
seats – and sits down right next to you! The feeling that you now have is
called ‘expectancy violation’. You expected something different – that the
person would find an empty seat, not one right next to you. In 1985, the
American Judee Burgoon developed the Expectancy Violations Theory, which
analyses how our expectations of another person affect the way we respond to
unanticipated violations of these expectations or social norms. According to
Burgoon, the following rules apply in the Western world with regard to
keeping our distance:
1. Intimate space (elbow room): up to 50 cm. Within this space, we expect
to be touched by the other person. It is reserved for close family, lovers and
pets.
2. Personal space: 50–120 cm. The typical distance we keep from somebody
we are talking to.
3. Social space: 120–360 cm. The distance we keep from people we do not
know, with whom we do not communicate, but whom we have nothing
against.
4. Public space: 360 cm or more. This distance is best explained if we ask
ourselves: which people do we avoid?
Of course, it is not only about distance, but also about physical and eye
contact. If someone turns away from us while we are speaking, it violates our
expectations of the conversation. This is most easily observed in romantic
relationships, where the usage of smartphones and social media is for many a
strong sign of divided attention and a source for trouble.
The distance we keep is also influenced by cultural and situational norms.
Different distance rules apply to dancing in a club and studying in a library. In
Switzerland, people greet one another with three little kisses; in the USA, this
would be regarded as too close for comfort.
When in Rome, do as the Romans do.



Why we should talk to each other about how we talk to each other
It’s an archetypal misunderstanding: A couple are sitting in a car and the
traffic lights turn green without the driver noticing. The passenger says: ‘It’s
green.’ The driver replies testily: ‘Am I driving or you?’
This example comes from Friedemann Schulz von Thun. His
‘communication square’ does not count as a theory in the narrower sense, but
it breaks down the many pitfalls of communication in a clearer way than other
approaches. According to Thun, every message has four layers:
1. Content (what I am informing myself about).
2. Appeal (what I want to achieve).
3. Relationship (my relationship to the receiver).
4. Self-disclosure (what I show of myself).
Our example contains the content layer (‘The traffic light is green’), the
appeal layer (‘Come on, drive!’), an allusion to the relationship (the passenger
wants to help the driver) and the self-disclosure layer (the passenger is
probably in a hurry). These are the four facets of the sender’s message.
The person receiving the message – in this case, the driver – does so with
his own four ‘ears’. On the content layer (‘The traffic light is green’) the two
people are still in agreement, but the driver interprets the appeal (‘Come on,
drive!’) differently (i.e. ‘Why are you so slow?’) and finds this insulting. He
reacts accordingly: ‘Am I driving or you?’
We encounter this kind of flawed communication all the time: ‘Hey, what’s
this in the soup?’ – ‘If you don’t like it, eat bread.’ ‘When will you be ready?’
– ‘Stop hassling me!’
The way we understand messages is determined by the sender’s and
receiver’s previous history, the context, the tone and many other non-verbal
signals. How can we solve misunderstandings? By talking to each other about
how to talk to each other; in other words, by practising ‘metacommunication’. Because good communication occurs when intention and
understanding are in harmony.
‘What is thought is not always said; what is said is not always heard; what is
heard is not always understood; what is understood is not always agreed; what
is agreed is not always done; what is done is not always done again.’
Konrad Lorenz



Why it’s worth talking to each other
The twentieth century was the century of mass murder. Two world wars took
place within a period of thirty years. In-between, there was some lousy
diplomacy. The logic of this period was: ‘The clever side never gives in and
comes out on top.’ To win you have to take action, not negotiate. Europe was
in ruins by the time the game was over.
During this period, John von Neumann, a mathematician, and Oskar
Morgenstern, an economist, developed their famous Game Theory. This
theory examines conflicts in which the result for all participants depends on
decisions made by others – as in negotiations. Game Theory is based on the
observation that people in conflicts behave in the same way as they would
when playing a board game: they want to win, but do so by sticking to the
rules of the game, otherwise it won’t work. How do you win but still follow
the rules? The solution: by approaching and talking to each other. Or, in the
words of game theorists, by cooperating.
Let’s take a simple example. At some point, most adults decide not to give
each other Christmas presents any more. The pressure to consume is
annoying, and, in any case, what do you give a person who has everything?
But typically some people still do buy a present, even if they agreed not to.
The person who gets the gift but didn’t give one in return now has a bad
conscience; the person who gave but didn’t receive is disappointed. The
result: conflict.
There are only two logical solutions and both have to do with
communication: you have to decide whether (a) everyone or (b) nobody gets a
gift. But this super-simple Game Theory solution can only be achieved if both
sides go along with the plan and if they make a binding agreement to stick to
it: two complex actions that people find hard to carry out.
‘Meeting jaw to jaw is better than war.’
Winston Churchill



How your therapist talks to you
What does your therapist do when talking to you? He or she makes a socalled ‘second-order observation’.
A first-order observer sees the world as it appears to him or her: the world
is simply there. The second-order observer, however, ascribes what the firstorder observer sees to how it is seen. Important: we cannot observe ourselves
observing (which is also why therapists can’t treat themselves). This is often
referred to as the ‘blind spot’. In other words, we are unaware of the way in
which we observe; we cannot see that we cannot see. So by identifying
someone’s blind spot, the second-order observer might open up a new
perspective, and make that person aware, for example, of the fact that he or
she could just as easily see something differently.
An example: a couple want to move in together, but she has one of those
flats that you simply wouldn’t want to give up: a great location, low rent, a
big balcony. And the flat would be big enough for two. He hesitates, because
he feels that he would be intruding and that it would still feel like her flat.
They cannot afford a new flat for the two of them. She sees only the potential
advantages of her flat, he sees only the potential disadvantages. Both are firstorder observers and are talking at cross-purposes.
A second-order observer could give them another perspective: the couple
could move into the woman’s flat, but on the condition that it becomes a
shared flat that they move into as if it were new. This means she has to first
‘move out’ of her flat, before the two of them ‘move in’ and refurbish it.
Despite the fact that most people constantly think about themselves, it is
impossible to observe yourself while doing (or thinking) something. We can
only train ourselves to be more aware of moments when we act or think
according to old (and bad) habits. But in order to recognize these patterns we
need a second observer.
We can’t see that we are seeing something.



Which ‘I’ do you use to communicate?
Here are two of the greatest interpreters of human communication:
· Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), the founder of psychoanalysis, believed that
hidden pleasures and fears from our childhood are the motivation behind
our communication problems.
· The psychiatrist Eric Berne (1910–70), however, believed that you do not
have to go on a painful journey into your past to get to know yourself; it is
enough to observe yourself in communication with others.
In 1964, Berne proposed in his book Games People Play a counter-model to
Freud’s theory, a book which due to its simplicity and clarity became a
bestseller in the genre of communication and self-help books. According to
Berne, it all starts with the three ‘ego states’ we adopt in relation to others:
1. The parent ego state: we all are a little like our parents. This is evident
when we patronize others or tell them what they should or should not do.
But also when we act thoughtfully, empathically or helpfully.
2. The adult ego state: we act like adults when we communicate in a
considered, controlled and relaxed way. In other words, when we treat the
other party respectfully and respond to criticism factually and
constructively.
3. The child ego state: we also carry in us the child that we once were. We
are unrepentant, defiant, silly or anxious. But positive qualities such as
imagination, curiosity and learning are also evident in our childlike
communication.
All states occur in one person. So what use is transactional analysis in
practice? When we communicate, it is always from one of these ego states.
We are not always aware of this; but it is most evident when we observe
ourselves. Let’s suppose that a proposal we put forward in a discussion is
rejected by the group. If we react in an offended way or respond defiantly, we
are in child mode. If we weigh things up rationally and realize that our
proposal was no good, we are in the adult mode. But if we argue morally that
the others are wrong because we are right, we are in parent mode.
If communication does not work, you should ask yourself: what state am I in
at the moment – parent ego, adult ego or child ego?



How to talk to children (even if you don’t have any of your own)
If you’ve ever asked a child: ‘How was school today?’ or tried to explain to a
toddler that it shouldn’t feed washing powder to the cat, you know that good
communication can be more complicated than algebra. So here are some tips
from parenting experts:
· Be a role model: actions speak louder than words. A child won’t understand
that he shouldn’t scream if you scream at him.
· Correct content, not form: the child says: ‘I draw horsy.’ That’s fine, as
long as she is drawing a horse.
· Be consistent: ‘no’ means ‘no’ – even when the child is having a tantrum at
the supermarket check-out. Loophole: only make threats that you can go
back on without losing face. So don’t say: ‘If you don’t stop right away we
won’t go away on holiday.’
· Implement threats immediately: children learn more quickly and
effectively if you carry out your threats straight away. Instead of taking
away a toy once for a whole week (long duration, small effect), it is better to
take away the toy ten times for two minutes (small duration, big effect).
· Praise an action, not the child: ‘What you’re doing is great’ is better than
‘You’re great.’
· Ignore bad behaviour: when a child does not behave according to your
expectations, but isn’t putting himself or others in danger, it is better to
ignore him than to rebuke him (‘selective attention’).
· Offer alternatives: give your child different options, but never more than
two, and only if an alternative makes sense (there is no alternative to teeth
brushing).
· Tell a child what she should do, and not what she shouldn’t do: it’s better
to say: ‘Please slow down’ than ‘Don’t run!’
· Ask questions that can be answered: ‘How was school today?’ is as
difficult for your child to answer as it would be for you to answer: ‘How
was March to April 2014 for you?’
· Adults were children once, too: these rules of communication apply to all
ages.
‘It is easier to build strong children than to repair broken men.’
Frederick Douglass



When we think of the best arguments
‘The term l’esprit de l’escalier (“staircase wit”) refers to opinions and ideas
that we express with clear, polished pithiness – and which always occur to us
too late. Afterwards, when we slowly descend the stairs, we are suddenly
much smarter than before.’ This is how William Lewis Hertslet described the
term in his bestseller Der Treppenwitz der Weltgeschichte (Staircase Wit of
World History), which was published in 1882.
Over 130 years later it is still as relevant as ever. We all know how it feels
when our brain starts to work only when the pressure of a stressful situation
subsides. Before a date or job interview, we know exactly how we want to
present ourselves, but when the small talk starts, we can’t think of anything
clever to say. Then, once the conversation is over and we have closed the door
behind us, we come up with razor-sharp arguments and witty lines. In
psychology, this phenomenon when your nerves fail under pressure is called
‘choking’: you ‘choke’ on the expectations.
Many studies have dealt with this phenomenon, and have all come to the
same conclusion: paralysis by analysis. If you start thinking, you lose. If you
try to be quick-witted, you can’t think of anything to say. When you go for
that all-important penalty kick, your confidence plummets. Psychologists
recommend four tricks:
1. Expose yourself repeatedly to the same situation (so-called ‘practice under
pressure’), whereby the situation loses its uniqueness.
2.Wait five seconds before answering – your answer might not be any
cleverer, but it comes across as weightier.
3.Not so easy: imagine that you’re not in an interview but sitting in the pub
with friends.
4.Keep in mind that although being quick-witted can be impressive in an
interview, it is seldom required in most jobs.
‘Nothing in life is as important as you think it is while you are thinking about
it.’
Daniel Kahneman

WORDS AND MEANINGS



What kind of image we have of the world
In communication, there is a fundamental rule: how something is said and by
whom – the ‘narrative context’, or frame – determines how something is
understood. To take one example, if a sensational piece of news is printed in a
reputable newspaper, we are more inclined to believe it than if it is reported in
a tabloid.
This observation was made by Erving Goffman, who described this form of
interpretation as ‘framing’. If we look at a picture in a museum, we know that
it is art even if it looks like a stick figure drawn by a child. This is because we
have learned to recognize the frame ‘modern art’. Another example: if we go
to a restaurant, we know how to behave – how to interact with the waiter, how
to handle a knife and fork, and what to do with the menu. We know this
because we know the frame ‘restaurant’. In his seminal work The
Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, Goffman uses the imagery of theatre
and acting to describe human social interaction. He believes that we each
adapt our behaviour to each frame and are therefore a different person in each
situation. This means that there is no such thing as authenticity. We are one
person when we are at work, another when we talk to our parents and quite
another when we are lost in a foreign city and have to communicate with
strangers.
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky famously showed how different ways
of phrasing frame a dilemma and affect people’s responses to a choice. This
logic is used to great effect in advertising. For example, two yoghurts are on
sale: one is ‘90% fat-free’ and the other is touted as having a ‘10% fat
content’. Although both contain equal quantities of fat, people tend to choose
the yoghurt advertised as ‘almost fat-free’, because the frame for the yoghurt
purports that it is a fat-free, healthier product. The bottom line is: we seldom
make rational choices.
There are no objective or authentic messages. Everything that is being
communicated is always framed. And if you want to decode a message, try to
understand the frame.



Why the medium is the message
The Canadian media scholar Marshall McLuhan (1911–80), who generally
shunned the limelight, became the world’s most talked-about intellectual in
1967. This was because he had summed up the media revolution – the
transition from print to TV – in a single sentence: ‘The medium is the
message.’ The sentence is not as simple as it first appears.
What does it mean?
It does not mean what you might initially think, i.e. that the medium has
become more important than its message. (A hint: McLuhan’s theories never
focus on the obvious, clear-cut or logical.) Rather, the sentence means that the
medium is not important because of its message, but because it can change
our behaviour, our thinking and our lives.
And what does that mean?
If we use the word medium, we are usually only referring to the channel via
which information is transmitted. McLuhan believed that this channel is more
formative for our culture than the message it carries. If the message changes,
we simply change our minds. But when the medium changes, we change our
behaviour. This sounded crazy in the 1960s. But since the advent of social
media, and since we have started to reflect on the ways in which mobile
devices dominate our everyday lives, it makes much more sense. Suddenly,
his meaning is crystal-clear: it’s not what we read on our smartphone that
changes our behaviour, but that we are reading it on our smartphone. (What
makes our smartphone so fascinating that we stroke it more than our newborn child? – See ‘The Uses and Gratifications Theory’.)
‘We shape our tools and the tools shape us,’ wrote McLuhan. He also
wrote: ‘People don’t really read newspapers. They just climb into them every
morning like into a hot bath.’ Was there ever a better description for the
Internet? In his time, McLuhan was taken more seriously by hippies than
academics. This was a double misunderstanding, because, as a conservative
Catholic, he was opposed to the media developments he described.
The news doesn’t change us; the medium does: take a minute and make a list
of five things that have changed in your behaviour since using a smartphone.
Now ask yourself: what changes do you regret? And finally: what would it
take to undo them?



What happens if you don’t look at your smartphone
The Internet has multiplied the number of ways in which we communicate.
While we still communicate one to one (in a personal email, for example), we
now also often communicate one to many (e.g. in a Facebook post or
WhatsApp group message).
One of the most important elements of online communication is selfpresentation: we only want to show our best side. We post photos of perfectly
prepared dishes, perfect holidays, perfect parties, perfect scores. And this
starts a vicious circle: whenever we feel bored or alone, we look at our
smartphone. But what are we looking for? We basically want to see that
others have seen us – a ‘like’, a ‘share’, a ‘retweet’ is proof of that. But when
looking at social media we also see the apparently perfect lives of our friends
– which we are not part of – and how these lives are being ‘liked’ and
‘shared’. Scientists call the ‘uneasy and sometimes all-consuming feeling that
we’re missing out – that our peers are doing or in possession of more or
something better than we are’ – ‘Fear of Missing Out’, or FoMO. A team of
psychologists at the University of Essex, led by Andy Przybylski, came up
with this name.
People under the age of thirty-five suffer more from this phenomenon, men
more than women, teenagers more than adults, unhappy more than happy
people. To clarify: it’s not a question of really missing out on something; it’s
about the feeling of having missed out on something. We’ve all been there:
when we’re feeling down, bored or stressed out, we check our smartphone.
But all this does is make us feel even worse. Smartphones act like an
accelerant when it comes to FoMO – and thereby corroborate the fifty-yearold ‘McLuhan’s Media Theory’: ‘The medium is the message.’
‘In the twentieth century “I think, therefore I am” no longer applies, but rather
“Others are thinking of me, therefore I am.” ’
Peter Sloterdijk



How to recognize fake news
The term ‘fake news’ has become ubiquitous in recent years. But what is fake
news? Basically it is an aggressive way to influence people. But, fake or not,
all news is influencing – something which the inventor of public relations,
Edward L. Bernays, took full advantage of. (Fun fact: Bernays was the
nephew of Sigmund Freud, founder of psychoanalysis.) His most famous
work, which he wrote in 1927, was originally entitled Propaganda, but he
later changed the name to Public Relations. Bernays wrote: ‘The conscious
and intelligent manipulation of the organized habits and opinions of the
masses is an important element in democratic society … We are governed,
our minds moulded, our tastes formed, our ideas suggested, largely by men
we have never heard of.’ It’s a pretty good description of the world we live in,
isn’t it? But how should we interpret Bernays’s strangely euphoric-sounding
text?
Like this: freedom of expression is a democratic right. When everyone
expresses their opinion, millions of opinions and interests collide, and chaos
ensues. So either you create order out of the chaos by implementing
restrictions (which would be a dictatorship) or you have to make your own
opinion as attractive as possible and market it as such. You can use all the
tricks of the trade to come out on top. You can manipulate a little, cheat a
little, exaggerate a little to make yourself more interesting. Ideas can be
presented as attractive or less attractive, and it is up to individuals to decide
whether they want to follow them. This means: PR and advertising or even
fake news cannot force us to do anything we don’t want.
If you want to analyse (fake) news, a good starting point is the light-hearted
model developed by the American sociologist Harold D. Lasswell in 1948,
which still works astonishingly well today: for example, to separate fakes
from facts. The formula is: ‘Who says what in which channel to whom with
what effect’:
· WHO?: by answering ‘who’said it, we divert our attention to the sender.
Lasswell called this ‘control analysis’: who is talking? What is their aim?
Who are their allies?
· WHAT?: by looking at ‘what’ is being said, we give attention to the actual
message (the ‘content analysis’) – to identify the aim behind the message
we can, for example, ask: how are women or people of colour represented?
What does the phrasing imply?
· WHICH?: by answering the ‘which channel’ question we make a ‘mediaanalysis’: why are they using this channel? How can they afford it? Who

paid for it?
· TO WHOM?: the ‘audience analysis’ can, for example, reveal something
about the aim of the sender: why are they talking specifically to these
people?
· WITH WHAT EFFECT?: with the ‘effect analysis’ we ask: how did the
audience react? What does this tell us about the sender?
Lasswell was concerned with the effects of mass media. But his message also
applies to interpersonal communication. His formula is a simple way to
sharpen your senses for propaganda. Wherever it’s coming from.



What we want when we’re online
What makes screens so attractive was a question already being asked by
researchers in the early days of television. In 1960, the sociologist Elihu Katz
claimed to have the answer. His ‘Uses and Gratifications Theory’ was
radically different from other media effect theories. He believed that media
consumption was an active, voluntary decision, and consequently did not ask
what media does to us, but what we do with media. He identified five reasons
why we use media and what we use it for (spoiler alert: the first three reasons
are obvious, the second two interesting):
1. Information and education: we consume media to discover what has
happened but also to educate ourselves.
2. Entertainment: we consume media for our emotional or aesthetic
pleasure.
3. Identification: we consume media because we identify with people we see
on screen.
4. Integration and social interaction: we consume media so that later we
can talk about what we saw or heard with others. Today the so-called
‘second screen’ comes into play: we watch TV and at the same time
consume via a second screen like a smartphone, with the consequence that
we are alone and yet not lonely (for example, #doctorwho or #strictly) –
see ‘The FoMO Phenomenon’.
5. Escapism: we consume media to escape reality. Everyone is familiar with
this behaviour: we immerse ourselves in a film, a game or the Internet and
forget about ourselves.
It is important to notice that according to this theory media do not force us
into anything – we decide for ourselves what we want to use.
‘When I die I want my tombstone to say “Free WiFi” so people will visit
more often.’
Unknown



How messages can be understood differently
A small but significant question: is what I can hear the same as what you are
saying?
Every child that has ever played Chinese Whispers knows the answer: not
always.
One of the greatest communication theorists, Stuart Hall (1932–2014), was
of the same opinion. In fact, he took the idea further. He believed not only
that we are capable of misunderstanding, but that we play an active role in
understanding, per se. We interpret, or ‘decode’, the same message
differently, depending on our social class, our level of knowledge and our
cultural background. But, above all, the way we understand a message also
depends on how we want to understand it. An example is the cult 1960s TV
series Star Trek. Many fans interpreted the series as a classic science fiction
adventure in space. But the gay community saw the close-knit relationships
between the men and the rainbow crew (black African, Asian, Russian,
Vulcan) as an allusion to the fact that some of the characters were gay. It is
irrelevant that Star Trek’s creator, Gene Roddenberry, denied this, because,
according to Stuart Hall, the message can be changed once it has been
received. In other words, Star Trek fans saw in the series what they wanted to
see.
The Encoding/Decoding Model contradicts the classic sender–receiver
model, according to which the recipient plays a passive role. Hall argued that
the way we receive a message is an active and never clear-cut process, so that
the message can always be understood differently. The sender encodes the
message with a particular intention. The receiver decodes the message in
order to understand it. And this decoding can happen in three different ways:
1. Dominant-hegemonic: the desired reading – we understand the message
the way it was intended
2. Oppositional: we oppose or dismiss the intended meaning
3. Negotiated: a combination of the two
A message is more than just what is said. It changes depending on how it is
understood.
Let’s put this into practice: if you are a leader, always make your team repeat
to you how they have understood your message. (That is, by the way, the
reason why co-pilots always repeat what they just heard the pilot say.)



How we interpret signs
When we want to communicate something, we use signs – words, gestures,
facial expressions, formulas, symbols or traffic signs – that the other person
has to translate into meaning. Semiotics is the study of signs; it is a crosssection of sciences from the disciplines of psychology, philosophy, sociology,
linguistics, computer science, design, art and mathematics. The bottom line is:
we find signs everywhere we come across culture rather than nature.
The key points in brief:
· Some signs – the swastika, a traffic light, the Nike swoosh – are easy to spot
and more legible than words. We see them and understand what is meant. A
story, a rating, a command or a message springs to mind.
· Perception in most people proceeds from image to text. We remember
drawings better than words, recognize patterns in representations more than
in sentences.
· Some of the most important semioticians believe that all the following are
signs: a Rolls-Royce in front of the door, a blue sky, a hundred-dollar note,
open shoelaces, a half-empty or half-full glass of water, a magic formula, a
traffic jam on the motorway, a sunset. Nothing can be perceived merely as
what it is. It will always (have to) be interpreted by the viewer as a sign of
something.
‘The visual is like the political: everyone thinks they understand something
about it, and to an extent this is true.’ So says the German Professor of Mass
Communication, Marion G. Müller. She makes an important point about the
design of signs and symbols: they are complex but need to be
comprehensible, otherwise there can be no communication.
Most people understand complicated matter better through images than in
words. We remember pictures better than text and are more likely to
recognize patterns in images than in sentences.



How we obfuscate with language
Speaking in euphemisms is a form of linguistic whitewashing. Governments
prefer to speak of ‘enhanced interrogation methods’ rather than torture. The
company spokesman will not say that staff are being dismissed, but that the
company is ‘restructuring’. Products are ‘a bargain’, not cheap. If we tell a lie
we are simply ‘stretching the truth’. And when we are broke, we can give it
the fancy expression ‘negative cash flow’. The opposite of a euphemism –
when you give something a negative meaning – is called a dysphemism:
someone with strong political views will immediately become an ‘extremist’.
Euphemisms are the stealth bombers of rhetoric. At first glance they are not
visible, but their attacks are insidious: by the time you become aware of them,
the damage is already done. The Nazis loved euphemisms: ‘land
consolidation’ instead of expulsion, ‘labour camp’ instead of concentration
camp, ‘special action’ instead of killing.
Euphemisms crop up in almost all political and corporate communications;
for example, a town hall meeting might suggest a friendly local gathering
where everyone can contribute, but in fact the CEO just wants to get a
particular message across. Downsizing suggests a sort of inevitability to
making a company somewhat cosier in size without mentioning job cuts.
Euphemisms are the mother tongue of manipulation. As a rule of thumb, if
someone doesn’t use straight language, don’t act straight away – pause before
acting.



How you can explain practically anything with spurious
correlations
In Ancient Greece, debate was central to the forming of opinions. A
distinction between good and bad reasoning was made:
· Good reasoning aims to convince, but it also lets itself be convinced.
Simply put, it is the search for truth.
· Bad reasoning has no interest in the truth; it is simply about wanting to be
right.
Plato called bad reasoning ‘sophistic’. The Sophists claimed to be able to
justify any position through reasoning and logic. They aimed at defeating
their opponents in debates using rhetorical strategies (see ‘Theory of
Rhetoric’) and logical arguments. The Sophists were unpopular, despised and
– successful.
A well-known example is that of Euathlus, who was educated in sophistry
by Protagoras. They made an agreement that Euathlus would only have to pay
for his instruction after he won his first lawsuit. But after his education
Euathlus took up a different profession. Therefore he did not conduct any
lawsuits, could not win any, and argued that he did not have to pay for his
instruction. Subsequently, Protagoras sued him and argued sophistically:
‘Euathlus will pay: if he wins the case, he will have to pay according to the
original agreement, and if he loses, the court will order him to pay.’ Euathlus,
Protagoras’ best-trained Sophist, replied: ‘I will not have to pay on any
account: because if I lose the case I do not have to pay according to the
original agreement, and if I win, I will owe you nothing according to the
verdict.’ It is an ingenious, logical argument, but also a deliberately induced
fallacy – a sophism.
Now, you should not think that sophism died out with the Ancient Greeks.
On the contrary: it still exists and is in excellent health! Modern instances of
sophism are spurious relationships: ‘In spring, storks return from the south. In
spring the number of births demonstrably increases. The two things must be
linked!’ No. The two statements correlate, but are not causal. What’s more,
they have nothing to do with each other.
‘Most of you will have heard the maxim “Correlation does not imply
causation.” Just because two variables have a statistical relationship with each
other does not mean that one is responsible for the other. For instance, ice
cream sales and forest fires are correlated because both occur more often in

the summer heat. But there is no causation; you don’t set a patch of the
Montana brush on fire when you buy a pint of Häagen-Dazs.’
Nate Silver



How the media corroborates our opinions
One of the most frequently cited communication theories is George Gerbner’s
Cultivation Theory from 1976, which claims that people who watch a lot of
television are more likely to ‘cultivate’ the belief that reality corresponds with
what they are seeing on TV. He argued that watching a lot of television
changes our perception of reality and causes anxiety.
The mass media – in the past film and TV, nowadays mostly games and the
Internet – confronts us with an exaggerated, stylized world. According to
Gerbner, those who consume a lot of media start to see the real world in the
way it is stylized on screen. Some examples: in everyday life we rarely see a
policeman with a drawn gun; in a crime drama, however, it is standard. In
reality we rarely see violence; on screen we see it all the time. According to
Gerbner, if we consume these kinds of on-screen images over a long period of
time, our perception of reality changes and we begin to internalize it. Even if
we don’t actually see any violence, we start to believe the world is a violent
place. And the more violent and frightening images we see, the more anxious
we become in our everyday lives.
So the media influences us. But to what extent? Does it mean, for example,
that excessively playing FPS (First Person Shooter) games will cause the
player to go on a killing spree? No, the media does not form our opinions and
beliefs, but it does reinforce them. So somebody who already has violent
fantasies will find affirmation for them online. But somebody who coexists
peacefully with others will not turn into a serial killer by watching violent
films several nights in a row.
It is important to remember that we prefer to watch things we enjoy – as is
demonstrated most clearly by the filter-bubble effect: on the Internet,
algorithms try to predict what information we will be looking for based on our
interests and opinions. That way there is little chance of being convinced by a
different opinion, because we are unlikely to be ‘served’ any alternative
views. When it comes to decision making this kind of self-confirming
information proves a huge risk, as explained in the chapter on ‘Groupthink’.
The Cultivation Theory has been criticized for its lack of complexity.
Viewers are regarded as passive and easy to manipulate. If you are interested
in the opposite view, take a look at ‘The Encoding/Decoding Model’.
If you like apples and spend hours watching a TV programme about pears,
you won’t suddenly prefer pears afterwards. But if you already like pears and
spend hours watching a programme about pears, you will like pears even
more afterwards.



What opinion has to do with power
Everyone has a voice, but not everyone is heard. The voices that prevail are
called ‘hegemonic’. The creation of hegemony has little to do with democracy
and everything to do with power. It is not a question of who has something
legitimate or important to say, but always of who has sufficient resources and
influence in a society to define their opinion as legitimate or important. The
hegemonic perspective is considered neutral. Anything that deviates from it is
seen as an exception and ascribed to others. The hegemonic view claims not
to represent a specific point of view, position or life experience, but rather to
represent things as simply ‘the way they are’.
An example: the media in the Western world is dominated by white male
journalists. Nevertheless, the news never announces: ‘Today you will hear the
news from a white male perspective.’ ‘White’ and ‘male’ are not explicitly
named; they are regarded as general, neutral and non-specific. Another
example: if a married couple are heterosexual, their sexual orientation isn’t
mentioned; if they are homosexual it is.
The question of hegemonic voices is associated with the concept of which
truths prevail. Here we come to the Standpoint Theory, whose most important
proponents are Donna Haraway and Sandra Harding. They maintain that a
voice – or standpoint – cannot be objective or neutral, or exist outside a
specific social context. Here is an example: in science – and in children’s
books to the present day – the idea that prehistoric people hunted mammoths
was long considered to be fact. Prehistoric people, or, more concretely,
prehistoric men, set off on dangerous mammoth-hunting expeditions. But in
fact this image was created in the nineteenth century at a time when hunting
was no longer essential for survival, but was simply a status symbol. In their
interpretations of prehistory, archaeologists neglected unspectacular types of
food procurement such as gathering berries and roots, or trapping small
animals.
This is not to say that men did not sometimes slay a mammoth. But it
distorts the fact that they mainly collected berries. Here, the historians were
not objective, but confirmed the stereotype of men as brave fighters, warriors
and family breadwinners, as if this were a law of nature. Bottom line: if you
believe that you hold an objective opinion, ask yourself what other points of
view were excluded so that yours could prevail.
If you want to make sure that every voice in the room is heard, you can ask
your team not to express their opinion about a given topic, but rather
brainstorm different possible opinions. That way sooner or later even the

unheard voices will appear on the flipchart and once they are up there, they
can be discussed.

CONCLUS ION



What we remember from a conversation
Here’s a question: how do we know if a presentation, a job interview or a date
went well?
We usually have a good hunch – but do we really know? Assessing a date
would involve some pretty complicated number crunching: we’d have to
calculate how we felt, how the other person felt, what we had expected and so
on. An impossible task.
It turns out our mind solves this problem by using a surprisingly simple
strategy, as Laurie Santos from Yale University explains brilliantly in a
lecture: when we remember something we ignore most of it. Actually we
make an assessment based only on two parts of the experience:
1. The peak – i.e. the part of the experience that was most extreme (either
pleasant or unpleasant).
2. The end – i.e. whether it got better or worse at the end. (This is important:
even a small improvement can make the date seem like an OK experience,
whereas a poor ending will ruin an otherwise great evening).
This is the Peak–End Rule, devised in a 1993 study by the Nobel laureate
Daniel Kahneman and his colleagues.
How can we use this in our life?
The Peak–End Rule gives us some hints about how to make an experience
special:
We often obsess about what kind of first impression we make on people,
fearing that people might judge us based only on our outward appearance or
first sentences. This thinking is based on the famous notion of ‘You only have
one chance to make a first impression.’ Though this holds true – the first thing
we hear about someone influences our judgement of that person, the first
price we are quoted forms the basis for the negotiation; it is the anchor effect
– maybe we should start obsessing about something else: there might be only
one chance to make a lasting impression. That lasting impression is not
necessarily the first impression, but rather the last one. (That is, by the way,
the reason why we binge-watch TV shows: by ending on a cliffhanger they
have perfected the Peak–End Rule.)
So when it comes to communication, it is of course important how we start
a meeting, how we set the tone, how we break the ice. But, according to
Kahneman’s work, maybe we should start focusing on how we want to end
the whole damned thing.

‘I don’t care about opening sentences. All I care about is the last sentence. It’s
the sentence the reader will go to bed with.’
Elfriede Jelinek

Sources
Active Listening: Carl R. Rogers, Counseling and Psychotherapy, Houghton
Mifflin, Boston, 1942; Celeste Headlee, ‘10 Ways to Have a Better
Conversation’,
www.ted.com/talks/celeste_headlee_10_ways_to_have_a_better_conversation
Boss Talk: Warren Bennis, On Becoming a Leader, Basic Books, New York,
1989
Cooperative Principle: Paul Grice, Studies in the Way of Words, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1989
Cultivation Theory: George Gerbner and Larry Gross, ‘Living With
Television: The Violence Profile’, Journal of Communication, Vol. 26, No.
2, 1976
Encoding/Decoding Model: Stuart Hall (ed.), Culture, Media, Language,
Routledge/University of Birmingham, London, 1992
Euphemisms: Malcolm Kushner, Public Speaking for Dummies, 2nd edn,
John Wiley, Hoboken, 2004
Expectancy Violations Theory: J. K. Burgoon and J. Hale, ‘Nonverbal
Expectancy Violations: Model Elaboration and Application to Immediacy
Behaviors’, Communication Monographs, Vol. 55, No. 1, 1988, pp. 58–79
Feedback Method: D. L. Cooperrider and D. Whitney, Appreciative Inquiry:
A Positive Revolution in Change, Berrett-Koehler, San Francisco, 2005
FoMO Phenomenon: A. K. Przybylski, K. Murayama, C. R. DeHaan and V.
Gladwell, ‘Motivational, Emotional, and Behavioral Correlates of Fear of
Missing Out’, Computers in Human Behavior, No. 29, July 2013
Framing Effect: Erving Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life,
Doubleday, New York/Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 1959
Game Theory: Erwin Amann, Spieltheorie für Dummies [Game Theory for
Dummies], Wiley, Weinheim, 2012
Groupthink: Irving L. Janis, Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy
Decisions and Fiascoes, 2nd edn, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1982

Iceberg Model: Floyd L. Ruch and Philip G. Zimbardo, Psychology and Life,
10th edn, Scott, Foresman, Glenview, 1979
Intercultural Communication: Richard D. Lewis, When Cultures Collide:
Leading Across Cultures, 3rd edn, Nicholas Brealey, Boston, 2007
Lasswell’s Communication Model: Harold D. Lasswell, ‘The Structure and
Function of Communication in Society’ (1948), in W. Schramm (ed.), Mass
Communications, 2nd edn, University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1960
L’Esprit de l’escalier: William Lewis Hertslet, Der Treppenwitz der
Weltgeschichte: Geschichtliche Irrtümer, Entstellungen und Erfindungen
(1882), BiblioLife, 2008
McLuhan’s Media Theory: Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The
Extensions of Man, McGraw-Hill, New York/Routledge & Kegan Paul,
London, 1964
Nonviolent Communication: Marshall B. Rosenberg, Nonviolent
Communication: A Language of Life, 3rd edn, PuddleDancer Press,
Encinitas, 2015
Parenting Tips: Tips from Jessica Hagy (diagram), Remo Largo, Jesper Juul,
Brett R. Kuhn, Joe Borgenicht and Gina Ford
Power Method: Robert Greene, The 48 Laws of Power, Viking Penguin, New
York, 1998
Principled Negotiation: Roger Fisher, William L. Ury and Bruce M. Patton
(ed.), Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement without Giving In, Houghton
Mifflin, Boston, 1991
Proust’s Questionnaire: William C. Carter and Henry-Jean Servat, The
Proust Questionnaire, Assouline, New York, 2005
Rules of Meetings: C. Northcote Parkinson, Parkinson’s Law, and Other
Studies in Administration, Ballantine, New York, 1957
Salami Tactic: Mária Palasik, Chess Game for Democracy: Hungary between
East and West, 1944–1947, McGill-Queen’s University Press, Montreal,
2011
Schulz von Thun’s Communication Model: Friedemann Schulz von Thun,
Miteinander Reden 1: Störungen und Klärungen, Rowohlt, Reinbek, 1981
Second-Order Observation: Niklas Luhmann, Die Kunst der Gesellschaft
[Art as a Social System], Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main, 1997
Self-Talk: Steven G. Rogelberg et al., ‘The Executive Mind: Leader SelfTalk, Effectiveness and Strain’, Journal of Managerial Psychology, Vol. 28,
No. 2, 2013, pp. 183–201

Six Principles of Persuasion: Robert Cialdini, Influence: The Psychology of
Persuasion, Collins, New York, 2007
Six-Word Rule: Larry Smith, Not Quite What I was Planning: Six-Word
Memoirs by Writers Famous and Obscure, Harper, New York, 2008
Small Talk: Gretchen Rubin, The Happiness Project, HarperCollins, New
York, 2009
Social Judgement Theory: Muzafer Sherif and Carl Hovland, Social
Judgment: Assimilation and Contrast Effects in Communication and
Attitude Change, Yale University Press, New Haven/London, 1961
Sophism: Bertrand Russell, A History of Western Philosophy (1946),
Routledge, London, 2004
Sorry Matrix: Roy J. Lewicki, Beth Polin and Robert B. Lount Jr, ‘An
Exploration of the Structure of Effective Apologies’, Negotiation and
Conflict Management Research, Vol. 9, Issue 2, May 2016, pp. 177–96
Speech Act Theory: J. L. Austin, How to Do Things with Words (William
James Lectures, 1955), Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Mass./Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1962
Spiral of Silence: Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann, The Spiral of Silence: Public
Opinion – Our Social Skin, University of Chicago Press, Chicago/London,
1984
Standpoint Theory: Sandra Harding (ed.), The Feminist Standpoint Theory
Reader: Intellectual and Political Controversies, Routledge, New
York/London, 2004
Storytelling: Walter Fisher, ‘Narrative Paradigm’, in Em Griffin, Andrew
Ledbetter and Glenn Sparks (eds), A First Look at Communication Theory,
9th edn, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2014, Ch. 24, pp. 303–13; William
Labov, ‘Some Further Steps in Narrative Analysis’, The Journal of
Narrative and Life History, No. 7, Issue 1–4, 1997, pp. 395–415
Theory of Rhetoric: Aristotle (trans. Franz G. Sieveke), Rhetorik, Wilhelm
Fink, Paderborn, 2010
Transactional Analysis: Eric Berne, Transactional Analysis in
Psychotherapy: A Systematic Individual and Social Psychiatry, Castle,
New York, 1961
Uses and Gratifications Theory: Elihu Katz, ‘Uses and Gratifications’, in
Em Griffin, Andrew Ledbetter and Glenn Sparks (eds), A First Look at
Communication Theory, 9th edn, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2014, Ch. 28,
pp. 353–62

Visual Communication: Roland Barthes, Mythologies, Cape, London, 1972
Watzlawick’s Axiom Theory: Paul Watzlawick, Janet Beavin Bavelas and
Don D. Jackson, Pragmatics of Human Communication: A Study of
Interactional Patterns, Pathologies and Paradoxes, W. W. Norton, New
York/London, 2011
White Lies: Sanjiv Erat and Uri Gneezy, ‘White Lies’, Management Science,
Vol. 58, No. 4, 2012, pp. 723–33

Thanks
We are very grateful to the following people who were involved in the
making of this book: Rebecca De Bautista (for the graphic design), Peter
Haag (for making it possible), Jessica Hagy (for the Solar System Model),
Marlene Iseli (for advice on linguistics), Juri Jacquemet (ici c’est Bienne!),
Angelina Keller (for staying on the ball), Jan-Dirk Kemming (for intelligent
advice), Julian Lambertin (for generously sharing his knowledge), Benno
Maggi (for sparring), Ondine Riesen (for actively listening), Christian Rohner
(for crystal-clear communication), Gretchen Rubin (for small-talk tips), Ueli
Schenk (for his detailed as well as inspiring feedback), Sara Schindler (for
proofreading), Franziska Schutzbach (for gender-sensitive language and
always moving the conversation forward), Marcelo Aragón Taravella (for the
inner team), Detlef Vögeli (for intelligent feedback), Sven Weber (for the
illustrations).
We would particularly like to thank everyone at the Museum of
Communication, Bern, Switzerland, for a great collaboration and for
believing in us.

THE BEGINNING
Let the conversation begin …
Follow the Penguin Twitter.com@penguinUKbooks
Keep up-to-date with all our stories YouTube.com/penguinbooks
Pin ‘Penguin Books’ to your Pinterest
Like ‘Penguin Books’ on Facebook.com/penguinbooks
Listen to Penguin at SoundCloud.com/penguin-books
Find out more about the author and
discover more stories like this at Penguin.co.uk

PORTFOLIO PENGUIN
UK | USA | Canada | Ireland | Australia
India | New Zealand | South Africa
Portfolio Penguin is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies whose addresses can be
found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com.
First published as Das Kommunikationsbuch by Kein & Aber 2017
This translation published 2018
Copyright © Kein & Aber AG Zurich and Berlin, 2017, 2018
This English translation by Jenny Piening and Lucy Jones is published by kind permission of the
Museum für Kommunikation, Bern, Switzerland
The moral right of the authors and illustrator has been asserted
ISBN: 978-0-241-98229-7